## Introduction to R

### Prerequisites:
- [R](http://cran.r-project.org/) 
- [RStudio](http://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/)

### Exercises:

The exercises 1 to 7 are based on on homework from Dr. C. Pelletier and Dr. L. Maruster - Learning Community R 2020 and licensed under the [Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/). Exercise 9 is based on a Bio-informtics exam at the Hanze Unversity course 'statistics 4' in 2015 made by Tsjerk Wassenaar.


### Exercise 1:
In 2019 Rami Malek won the 91st best actor award at the Oscar ceremony. Information has been gathered over him and is listed below:
Best Actor: RamiMaleK (Bohemian Rhapsody). The actor is American, born the 12th of May 1981 in LA (US), from Middle East ethnicity, Christian faith.
- a. Generate a named list ‘oscarWinnerBestActorProfile’ in which you store the information collected on Rami MaleK. Use meaningful names

The movie he played in "Bohemian Rapsody", is a Biography, has a imdb rating: 8.2, and is rated on Rotten tomatoes by expert with 0.61, and by the public with 8.8.
- b. Add this new following information to the list
- c. Remove the information about his faith
- d. Adjust the public rating on Rotten Tomatoes to 0.88 

### Exercise 2:
Create the following vector: ```vector1 <- c(2, 10, 4, 8, 6, 12)```

- a. Name the elements of the vector **vector1** as ```"one", "two", "three", "four", "five", "six”``` 
- b. Create a vector ```myNewVector.Position <- c(rep(vector1[3],4), vector1[4:5])```

Another way to generate **myNewVector.Position** is to index vector1 by using the names of the elements instead of the positions. 
- c. Generate from vector1 the vector ```myNewVector.Name <- c(rep(vector1["three"],4), vector1[c("four", "five")])```
- d. Verify that **myNewVector.Position** and **myNewVector.Name** are identical by using a relational expression
- e. Use the function **sort()** to arrange the elements of vector1 into increasing order. Assign the result into the variable **vector1.Sorted**
- f. Assign to **test1** and **test2** the commands ```c(rep(vector1.Sorted[3],4), vector1.Sorted[4:5])``` and ```c(rep(vector1.Sorted["three"],4), vector1.Sorted[c("four", "five")])``` respectively
- g. Compare using relational expressions **test1** and **test2** to **myNewVector.Position**, and **myNewVector.Name**. What do you remark? Explain.

### Exercise 3:
- a. Write a while loop that prints out random numbers generated by a normal distribution generator (use the function **rnorm()**), until the number generated is bigger to 1. In the output of your loop, no value 1 should be printed. 
- b. Using the statement **next**, adapt the loop from the previous question so that it doesn’t print negative numbers.

### Exercise 4:
Write an algorithm that produces the first 15 numbers of this series: 

				0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21 ...

### Exercise 5:
Three numbers define a triangle, if the sum of the two smaller numbers has to be larger or equal to the largest number.

- a. Write a function that check if a set of three numbers verify the definition of a triangle. The input of the function should be a vector containing three numbers, and the output should be a boolean: TRUE if it is a triangle and FALSE otherwise. 
- b. Write a function that check if a set of three numbers correspond to a measurements of a triangle with a right angle. The input of the function should be a vector containing three numbers, and the output should be *"The triangle has [a / no] right angle.”*. Hint: use **paste()**.
- c. Combine the two functions. The output should be: *"The vector [input] does [not] define a triangle.”* if test a is ```FALSE```. If test a is ```TRUE```, the output should be: *"The vector [input] do [not] define a triangle. The triangle has [a / no] right angle.”*.
Test the combined function for:
```R
c(4, 1, 7)	
c(4, 5, 4)
c(4, 7, 6)	
c(5, 4, 3)
```

### Exercise 6:
Create the data frame **‘student.df’**:

```R
student.df <- data.frame (name = c("Sue", "Eva", "Henry", "Jan"),                           
                          sex = c("f", "f", "m", "m") ,                           
                          years = c(17, 31, 29, 19))
```

Use an ```ifelse``` statement to add a new column **‘male.teen’** to the data frame. This is a boolean column, indicating ```TRUE``` if the observation is a male younger than 20 years.

### Exercise 7:
Download and safe the files: 
- [BestActorAward.csv](Data/BestActorAward.csv)
- [BestDirectorAward.csv](Data/BestDirectorAward.csv)
- [Films.csv](Data/Films.csv)

Set the working directory to the folder where you stored the files:
```R
setwd("")
```

Load the data files as follows:
```R
bestActorAwards.Df <- read.csv("BestActorAward.csv")
bestDirectorAwards.DF <- read.csv("BestDirectorAward.csv")
Films.DF <- read.csv("Films.csv")
```

Explore the data, what information is stored? What are the dimensions?

Generate a data frame of the films for which both the best Actor award and the best Director award have been won. Assign the output to the variable **filmsActorDirectorAward**. In this new data frame, the names of the actor and the director who got the award have to be present. 
- a. How many films are in this data frame?

Generate a data frame containing information about the recipient of the best director awards and the information about the film they have directed to get that award. Assign the output to the variable **DirectorExtendedDB**. 
- b. Check if the result is correct by using a relational expression on the number of rows of **DirectorExtendedDB**. If not, why?

### Exercise 8:
- a. Create a scatterplot using **ggplot** of the iris dataset (by default available: ```head(iris)```).  Plot the sepal length on the x-axis, the petal length on the y-axis and color each point according to the species. 
- b. Add a linear regression line for each group. Do not include the confidence interval. 
- c. Create a boxplot of the same dataset. Plot the species on the x-axis and the petal length on the y-axis .


### Exercise 9:

The file ['ebola.csv'](Data/ebola.csv) contains the total cases of ebola from the start of the outbreak in March 2014 until January 4th 2015. It also contains the logtransformed number of cases.
- a. Read the data in. Plot the number of cases against the day and look at the graph. It shows a typical growth curve. Now plot the LogCases against the day. It shows the same data, but after a transformation. Is the correlation strong or weak?
- b. Perform linear regression on the transformed data and add the regression line to the plot. Write the regression model as comment:
```R
# Cases = ...
```
- c. Briefly discuss the regression results. Is the regression relation statistically significant? How much of the variance is explained by the model?
- d. Plot the residuals and comment on the quality of the model.






